As an example of linear regression,
we'll look at the line heart
data from the car package in R.
Let's first load this package,
library("car").
And to access a data set
that comes with a package,
we could use the data function and
tell it which data set we want.
It's the Leinhardt data set and
before we look at the data,
let's learn a little bit about
it from the documentation.
Through question mark Leinhardt,
if we run that line of code it brings up
the documentation page for these data.
The leinhardt dataset contains
data on infant mortality for
105 nations of the world
around the year 1970.
It contains four variables per
capita income in US dollars.
Infant mortality rate
per 1,000 live births.
A factor, or categorical variable
indicating which region of
the world this country is located.
And finally, whether this country
exports oil as an indicator variable.
If we want to learn more
about the data set,
we can also look to these
different sources were references.
Now that we know a little bit about
these data set, let's explore it.
First, I'm going to look at
the head of the data set.
The first few lines were we see these
four different variables, income,
infant mortality rate, region, and
whether the country exports oil.
For the first several
countries in this data set.
We can also look at
the structure of the data set,
to see what types of
variables these all are.
str(Leinhardt) And
here we can see that income
is an integer variable.
Infant is numeric or
floating-point numeric.
Region is a factor or
a categorical variable with four levels.
And oil is a factor variable
with two levels, no and yes.
To investigate the marginal
relationships between each of these
four variables, we can plot each
of the scatter plots using pairs.
So we say pairs(Leinhardt)
which creates scatter plots for
every pair of variables together.
For example, this plot is the scatter
plot between infant mortality rate and
income where infant mortality rate is on
the X axis and income is on the Y axis.
The same goes for categorical variables.
And you can see that there are two
versions of the same plot,
this one is between infant and income.
And this one is also between infant and
income with the axis reversed.
Instead of modeling all these variables
at once, let's start with a simple linear
regression model that relates infant
mortality to per capita income.
So let's do a plot for that one as well.
We're going to plot
infant mortality against
income where our data set is Leinhardt.
As you look at this scatter plot,
you might be asking yourself, is a linear
model actually appropriate here as a model
between income and infant mortality?
This relationship certainly
doesn't look linear.
In fact, both of these variables
are extremely right skewed,
to see that let's look at a histogram
of each one individually.
We'll do a hist of the infant variable.
And immediately you can see
how right skewed it is.
And now let's look at a histogram.
For income.
Again, that one is very right-skewed.
Most values are very small, and
then they scatter across large values.
The short answer is no.
A linear regression is not appropriate for
these variables.
However, we did notice that these
variables are positive valued and
very strongly right skewed.
That's a hint that we could try
looking at this on the log scale.
So let's recreate these plots now
with variables that are transformed.
So let's look at Leinhardt and
we're going to save a new variable,
let's call it logInfant.
It's going to be the log of
Leinhardt infant mortality rate.
We'll run that and let's create another
variable that's just like it for
the income variable.
And we'll run that.
Now let's look at the relationship
between logincome and loginfant.
We'll plot loginfant against logincome.
Where the data are still Leinhardt.
I would say that a linear model is
much more appropriate choice now.
You can imagine fitting a line
through these data points.
Let's start a new section and
call it modelling.
Remember that the reference Bayesian
analysis with the non-informative prior or
a flat prior on the coefficient
in the linear model
is available directly in
R using the LM function.
Let's fit one of those and
call it L-mod for linear model.
LM where we used the same
syntaxes we did to plot these
variablesw loginfont will
be our response variable.
Against logincome,
where the data is Leinhardt.
We can run this linear model and
look at a summary of the results.
Under our non-informative flat prior,
here are the estimates,
the posterior mean estimates for
the coefficients.
These estimates are very large
relative to their standard error, or
in this case, standard deviation
of the posterior distribution.
And so they appear to be very
statistically significant.
Residual standard error gives us
an estimate of the left over variance
after fitting the model.
The r squared statistics tell
us how much of the variability
is explained by the linear model,
in this case about half.
Also, don't miss this crucial line.
It tells us that four of the observations
in the dataset were deleted.
They were not used in the model
because they contained missing values.
There are statistical methods for
dealing with missing values, but
we're not going to discuss
them in this course.
So we're going to follow the example of
the linear model function and we're going
to delete the observations that have
missing values before we perform analysis.
So, what we can do here
is save a new data set.
We'll cal it dav, and
it will come from the data set
Leinhardt where we omit missing values.
To do this in R we use na.omit and
we give it the data set.
Let's look at the original
dataset really fast just so
we can see which countries
it was that we omitted.
If we run Leinhardt
we see that there are missing values for
Nepal.
There are missing values for Laos.
For Haiti.
And for Iran.
Those four countries will not
be included in our analysis.